# raek's capsule

Welcome to my capsule! I'm raek [rɛːk] (Rasmus Bondesson), an all over the place nerd from Sweden. This capsule was launched 2022-07-17.

## Latest Posts

=> gemini://blog.raek.se/2023/08/16/first-contact-with-an-antenna-made-in-a-hurry/ 2023-08-16 (blog) First Contact with an Antenna Made in a Hurry
=> gemini://blog.raek.se/2023/06/26/finishing-the-bitx40-case/ 2023-06-26 (blog) Finishing the BITX40 Case
=> gemini://blog.raek.se/2023/03/09/new-case-for-my-bitx40-radio/ 2023-03-09 (blog) New Case for my BITX40 Radio
=> gemlog/2023-01-26-family-toki-pona-playdate-bitsy-and-the-clarinet.gmi 2023-01-26 (gemlog) Family, toki pona, Playdate, Bitsy, and the Clarinet
=> gemlog/2023-01-03-pali-anu-lape.gmi 2023-01-03 (gemlog, toki pona) pali anu lape
=> gemlog/2022-11-18-joined-mastodon.gmi 2022-11-18 (gemlog) Joined Mastodon
=> gemini://blog.raek.se/2022/10/31/os-integration-files-in-python-packages/ 2022-10-31 (blog) OS Integration Files in Python Packages
=> gemlog/2022-10-07-making-my-blog-mobile-friendly.gmi 2022-10-07 (gemlog) Making my Blog Mobile-Friendly
=> gemlog/2022-09-14-python-and-debian-packages.gmi 2022-09-14 (gemlog) Python and Debian Packages
=> gemlog/2022-09-06-on-my-mind.gmi 2022-09-06 (gemlog) On my mind

## My Stuff

Everything on this capsule (raek.se) is only served on Gemini. Stuff also available on HTTPS is served on separate subdomains (for example, blog.raek.se).

=> gemlog/ Gemlog - Gemini exclusive!
Here I write shorter texts. More personal. Less sensical.

=> gemini://blog.raek.se/ Blog - also on HTTPs
My blog is served on both Gemini and HTTPS. Most of the posts were written before I launched my Gemini capsule, but have been converted to gemtext for comfortable reading.

=> links/recommendations.gmi Recommended Capsules and Pages
Gemini space is an interesting place! This is where I keep links to things you should check out.

=> toki-pona/ lipu tomo pi jan Wekan
ni li lipu tomo mi kepeken toki pona.

=> projects/retrograde/ Retrograde
A Python library for hosting orbits ("webrings").

=> books.gmi Books I've read
Chronological list starting from 2019 (when I had a reading resurgence).

=> test.gmi Gemini client test page
Unicode and emojis in domain names! I set up some silly domains so you don't have to.

=> https://raek.se/ My old-fashioned HTTP website
Since you're visiting from Gemini, you might not be scared by the unformatted HTML.

## Orbits

An orbit is a ring of Gemini pages linking to each other (like a webring on the web, but for Gemini).

=> gemini://raek.se/orbits/space-elevator/ Space Elevator - The quickest way into orbit
=> gemini://raek.se/orbits/space-elevator/next?gemini%3A%2F%2Fraek.se%2F Next Page
=> gemini://raek.se/orbits/space-elevator/prev?gemini%3A%2F%2Fraek.se%2F Previous Page
=> gemini://raek.se/orbits/space-elevator/random?gemini%3A%2F%2Fraek.se%2F Random Page

=> gemini://raek.se/orbits/omloppsbanan/ Omloppsbanan - An orbit of capsules by Swedish geminauts
=> gemini://raek.se/orbits/omloppsbanan/next?gemini%3A%2F%2Fraek.se%2F Next Page
=> gemini://raek.se/orbits/omloppsbanan/prev?gemini%3A%2F%2Fraek.se%2F Previous Page
=> gemini://raek.se/orbits/omloppsbanan/random?gemini%3A%2F%2Fraek.se%2F Random Page

=> gemini://tilde.team/~khuxkm/leo/ Low Earth Orbit (LEO) - The first orbit
=> gemini://tilde.team/~khuxkm/leo/next.cgi?gemini%3A%2F%2Fraek.se%2F Next Page
=> gemini://tilde.team/~khuxkm/leo/prev.cgi?gemini%3A%2F%2Fraek.se%2F Previous Page
=> gemini://tilde.team/~khuxkm/leo/random.cgi?gemini%3A%2F%2Fraek.se%2F Random Page

## Contact

=> contact.gmi See this page!
